---
title: Holistic views of nearly everything
layout: post
---

Finding connections between disparate fields fascinates me -- the similarities between [work habits of hackers and painters](http://www.paulgraham.com/hp.html), for example. I believe time spent studying a field indirectly related to one's field is never wasted; although the benefits are often not immediately quantifiable, a better understanding of other aspects of the world cannot be discounted. When we speak of creativity, we often mean the ability to adapt existing processes and metaphors to something which had none before. Relating this to my university experience, I remain an advocate for hard science majors taking "soft" science, or humanties courses.

Analytical and procedural thinking are, of course, the bread and butter of computer science education, but the truly innovative are able to call on knowledge from seemingly unrelated fields. [John Holland](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Henry_Holland) took the idea of gene replication and adapted it into a well-known algorithm. Alan Kay, trained as a biologist, took the idea of cellular processes as the basis for object-oriented programming: encapsulation serving as an analogue to the cell wall, and signaling between the cells representing something akin to message passing. Regarding business decisions, understanding the incentives of your customer and the job to be done has more to do with empathizing with your users than developing a feature-filled product, which no amount of quantitative reasoning can wholly solve (c.f., Google). This realization has led to technology companies increasingly emphasizing interaction design in product development, which in turn has its roots in applied psychology. Systems thinking, now commonly applied in business development, was largely inspired by the work of Donella Meadows, an environmental scientist who wrote the [The Limits of Growth](http://www.amazon.com/Limits-Growth-30-year-Update/dp/184407143X) in 1972, a study of how exponential processes interact with finite resources with a focus on Earth's natural resources. (Another one of her books, [Thinking in Systems](http://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Systems-Donella-H-Meadows/dp/1603580557), remains a favorite read of mine as a simple explanation of sytems thinking.)

Breadth in thinking, to me, means reading widely, critically, and then more deeply in fields one finds most interesting. This skill, "learning how to learn," is one of the tenants of a liberal arts education, but tends to be glossed over during a typical engineer's undergraduate education. I would hope that over time, more engineers and technologists-cum-entrepreneurs give themselves time to really explore more of these seemingly unrelated fields, if nothing but for perspectives' sake. 
