---
title: Tufte and Infographics
---

I recently read Tufte's [Visual Display of Quantitative Information](http://www.amazon.com/Visual-Display-Quantitative-Information/dp/096139210X). Althought it predates the predominance of digital infographics, the text applies to any two dimensional medium. 

One of the main ideas is that **good information design strives to reveal the greatest number of ideas in the shortest time, with the least ink, in the smallest space.** 

It's interesting to contrast this with the trend of infographics, which seek to firstly entertain through visual experiences. Tufte would call this "chartjunk," as its design does nothing to contribute to a user's real comprehension of the underlying data. 

I would argue for somewhere in between, that infographics serves a job to be done. It allows those seeking a ready-made conclusion enough facts to support a stance. In other words, it serves as a high schooler's persuasive essay, emphasizing and summarizing data to aid a predetermined conclusion. In reality, infographics are often presented as supplements to an editorial in another medium, like on cable or in an article, and serve much the same purpose. A Tufte disciple would find the practice of willful filtering of information reprehensible, and would instead seek to create a graphical representation of the *entirety* of the data present, with a thought that the display would compel the viewer to her own conclusions. On the whole, I tend to side with information oversharing, as "simplifying" based on presumptions of limited time or critical reasoning skills can often lead to wild misconceptions.
