---
title: Papert's Mindstorms
layout: post
---
**Image of Mindstorms book**
*Seymour Papert, 1980. MIT Press.*

Seymour Papert must be an amazing man. My only proof of that is via the genius transitive property: Alan Kay cites his book, "Mindstorms," so frequently that I had to eventually get around to reading it. I picked up the revised 1993 edition, which also includes an introduction from John Sculley, among others.* Both found this relatively short book to be highly influential in their understanding of what it means to learn by *people teaching computers* rather than the computers teaching them. Papert's work was later realized as the LOGO project, whose research served as the basis for the founding of the MIT Media Lab.

* whose endorsement might now be considered questionable circa 2012

Papert's vision of a new pedagogy matured while working under Jean Piaget over 6 years in Geneva. He was known as being highly precocious and one the brightest students Piaget ever had; in fact, Piaget once said that "[no one understands my ideas as well as Papert.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructivism_(learning_theory)" He mentions that one of the greatest insights under his tutelage was in understanding just how much a child can learn without being explicitly taught. An example of this is given in the book: Papert as a child was fascinated with gears in automobiles, the differential axle in particular, and the way that the two wheel axles can move independently of each other while still connected to the drivetrain. This later informed his mental model of algebraic equations. For instance, given the equation:

	ax + by = 0

`a`  and `b` could represent different gear ratios. This gave him a means of intuiting information where school had provided only rote memorization. He goes on to describe the former's intuitive knowledge acquisition as *syntonic* learning, while conventional teaching favors the more abstract, *disassociated* learning model. This later informed Papert's own [theory  of constructionism](http://wiki.laptop.org/go/Constructionism), which  provided the theoretical basis to the One Laptop Per Child project. 

Papert's real genius, arguably, was in his spot-on prediction of the future of computing, and how this could potentially disrupt the US educational system. An unabashed advocate of the Piagetian model, he saw this as the best hope he had to capture the attention of a bureaucracy *en masse*. His motivation for the book is described in the postscript: 

> (1) significant change in patterns of intellectual development will come about through cultural change, and (2) the most likely bearer of potentially relevant cultural change in the near future is the increasingly pervasive computer presence.

In reality, his knowledge of the nature of cultural change was largely credited to his wife, Sherry Turkle, who was a sociologist and spent time researching how French culture had slowly come to adopt psychoanalysis. His basis premise was that cultural choices are difficult to reverse once a path has been taken. In other words, it's far more common to see adoption of incremental, rather than radical, ideas, in part due to social pressures. This is the phenomenon of waves of paradigmatic thinking à la Thomas Kuhn.*

* Papert, in Mindstorms, cites the "QWERTY phenomenon," named after the now-nonsensical arrangement of keyboard characters on a keyboard, where a culture digs itself "into an anachronism by preserving practices that have no rational basis beyond their historical roots in an earlier period of technological and theoretical development." 

Papert's main beef was with the mathematics curriculum in the US, which he felt emphasized *disassociated* learning at the expense of student interest levels and without regard to modern day technologies and context. Educational research assumed the classroom / extracurricular dichotomy as the basis for learning rather than questioning these foundations in the face of a changing world.* 

* He goes on to mention an amusing anecdote of a researcher in the 19th century who sets out to change transportation by studying efficiencies in carriage systems, meanwhile being totally blindsided by the development of the automobile.

He brings up an interesting point that people tend to historicize curriculum as an ideal, when in fact he points out that what is to be taught at a given time is largely relative to the period's culture and technology. He brings up the example that the reason we learn analytical geometry in high school has more to do with our ability to draw graphs using pen and paper accurately than our ability to comprehend its concepts. Another example would be the debates today over the merits of cursive with the proliferation of computer input devices.

Papert's prediction of the personal computer's dominance was correct, and with the age of mobile devices we're even more entrenched in a pervasively computational world. He was most excited about this from a pedagogical perspective: he wanted to use personal computers as a vehicle for getting  children *interacting* with a computer using Piagetian principles, rather than being taught a traditional curriculum masquerading in digital form. In a sentence:

> [...] the computer presence will enable us to so modify the learning environment outside the classroom that much if not all the knowledge schools presently try to teach with such pain and expense and such limited success will be learned, as the child learns to talk, painlessly, successfully, and without organized instruction.

The distinction to be made is that Papert saw this technological change as  a potential *disruptive* force in education rather than a *complementary* one; he had some very radical notions of what computers could change about the educational system. Although we've seen a rise in technology budgets across school districts via personal computers and tablet budgets across the nation, we haven't necessarily seen the predicted cultural shift towards new models of *learning*; rather, the focus has thus far been on creating new models of *teaching*, e.g., Khan Academy and its blended learning models. This could be due to any number of reasons, including: timing, emphasis on curriculum-based learning, increased focus on standardized testing, increasing class sizes, teachers' and parents' unfamiliarity with Piagetian learning principles or constructionism, or how to apply them, or the effectiveness of our educational software. 

Ironically, perhaps in correctly estimating the cultural change in computer usage he overestimated our current ability to see and articulate its potential as a new *learning* medium. This strikes me as most probable, as well as the most unfortunate circumstance, as the overlap between technologists and educators remains fleetingly few. Alan Kay elaborates on  the difficulties in re-imagining the present in a lecture called "[Programming and Scaling.](https://www.tele-task.de/archive/video/flash/14029/)"

In any case, Papert created LOGO as the culmination of his research in creating an expressive mathematical sandbox for children to explore. In my next post, I'll focus on how LOGO works, and how we can possibly use LOGO as a lens to view the state of educational software today.